---
layout: post
title: Rutgers Radio is Emancipating Electronic Music
---

Walk a few blocks behind the Rutgers Student Center on the right nights
and you’ll notice there’s something in the air. Of course, there’s the
smell of a nearby pizzeria, but that’s not quite what it is. Perhaps
there’s even the faint smog we’ve become accustomed to, but that’s also
not what I’m talking about. Notice instead that low, muffled, repeating
thud coming from ... everywhere. The youth of every generation since the
rise of the middle class have had their dance music: their swing, their
soul, their twist and shout, their disco. From disco’s use of the
synthesizer came the seed of today’s dance music, and the rise of the
personal computer and digital audio workspaces provided the necessary
fuel. We have *electronic* dance music.

Alternatively, tune-in to 90.3 The Core FM on Sundays beginning at
4:00PM and you’ll hear a much clearer and more coherent sound, beginning
with SQUO, followed by DJ Soma with Straight to the Hard Drive, then
with Lauren Jefferson with Eclecticism, and ending with DJ Psy with
Electronic Phonix. This style of electronic music is not necessarily of
the variety of the Netherland’s top 40 house hits, but a sound that’s
much more home-grown and personal.

With his show, SQUO retains that hard-hitting urge to dance from the
music of house parties and nightclubs while adding an underground,
undiscovered, up-and-comingness into his mix; the sound is
unapologetically electronic. His style is not the polite bass of
electronic music has become known for, but rather the grittier, more
soulful bass of artists like Branchez, Trippy Turtles, and Victor
Niglio. When not DJing for The Core, SQUO is brewing his own entries to
the electronic music scene. “I'd love to be able to reach out to more
budding artists”, says SQUO, who like the rest of the station, is
intensely committed to the community over the commercial, “I’d like to
develop a mixshow of my own, bringing on unknown DJs, featuring their
mixes, and having a discussion about their music.” You can learn more
about SQUO on his website, DJSQUO.com.

This emerging, soulful variety of electronic artists is sponsored and
broadcast by The Core FM, a purely student-run organization. Coming to
your radio dial at 90.3 FM and from their website thecore.fm, The Core
FM is available to the New Brunswick area and beyond. “I am about
inclusion, not exclusion”, says the General Manager Josh Kelly. With
both a New Brunswick community focus and World Wide Web prescence is
consistent with the The General Manager’s commitment to a broad and
diverse audience and Rutgers’ slogan, “Local Roots, Global Reach.” Josh
continues, “We try to keep commercialization out of the equation, we
want to find and showcase music that is for kids by kids, not by a big
budget producer.”

The show that immediately follows SQUO also exemplifies this attitude,
with DJ Soma’s show, Straight to the Hard Drive. DJ Soma resists the
commercialization of his music in both the sense that it isn’t from a
massive label, but also that the music is free and legal, with links on
DJ Soma’s blog, dj-soma.tumblr.com. “The beauty of electronic music too
is the fact that almost anybody with access to the technology can create
something unique, and distribute it to a possible audience of millions.”
says DJ Soma. His timbre cadences SQUO’s well, with ambient soundscapes,
gritty drums, and psychedelic synths. The electronic music’s soul
emerges from guitar riffs, turntablism, and occasionally samples from
music, movies, and radio circa 40's and 50's.

“I am really into keeping my ear to the streets”, says The Core General
Manager Josh Kelly, who is keeping his focus on the community aspect of
The Core. Not limiting themselves to a single medium to share music, The
Core FM recently worked with New Brunsiwck to organize a free and public
show in Boyd Park that showcased local talent. This is The Core’s
categorical attitude, as Josh says, “If it takes lots of money to get
somewhere, then it isn't part of a fair system, and people are
systematically left out in the cold in terms of participating.” 

Lauren Jefferson continues electronic music on Sundays with her show
Eclecticism at 8:00. As the name suggests, her style is much more
varied, retaining the electronic timbre and dance-inspiration while
producing excitement from novelty. Lauren is deeply committed to
bringing her listeners both a high-quality and novel listening
experience, “It hurts when I hear people say they can never find good
new music.”, says Lauren. On some occasions, Ecclectism’s timbre can be
downtempo and soulful with tracks from labels like, for example, Ghostly
International. Alternatively, the show can take on an entirely more
catchy and upbeat vibe with offerings from French label Kitsuné. You can
keep up with Lauren on her blog, eclecticism1.blogspot.com.

Concluding electronic music on Sundays is DJ Psy with his show,
Electronic Phonix with. DJ Psy has been broadcasting since 2008, and his
sound has grown with the station, with the genre, and with the
technology. Very excited with the state of the genre, “The cost of
production equipment is now as cheap as a laptop and some software”,
notes Psy, “We're seeing the biggest growth in a ‘genre’ since
amplifiers, guitars, and 4-tracks became commodities, forever changing
rock’n’roll.” Electronic Phonics is glittery, shiny, and bassy, with
beats that move your feet and featuring artists like The Magician, RAC,
Joe Goddard, LCD Soundsystem, Coleco, and Classixx.

The artists at the Core FM are challenging the music industry from two
sides, offering their community high-quality and non-commercial radio on
one front and then both sourcing and broadcasting their music using the
Internet on the other. As more and more people come to have control of
the means of electronic music production (computers and audio software),
there will be less and less possible or needed involvement from the
aptly antiquatedly named *record* industry. The Internet has emancipated
an entire generation of people wanting to express themselves, and The
Core FM is a manifestion of that. From Josh Kelly’s point of view, “We
want to find and showcase music that is by kids for kids, and not by a
big budget producer.
