---
layout: post
title: "Practicing Philosophy"
---

### The Unofficial Guide to Getting the Most of Undergraduate Philosophy at Rutgers University

A warning. Philosophy will keep you up at night. Your consciousness
might be an illusion. Skepticism looms over everything you thought you
knew. Our understanding of time may be fundamentally flawed. You could
be incapable of expressing yourself to others, doomed to loneliness
forever. It's possible you're part of a sociopolitical machine which
deals systematic injustice. Or maybe there isn't such a thing as
morality.

But, like many things that are worth losing sleep over, philosophy has
been neatly regimented into professional academia for hundreds of years.
I'd like to offer this guide as an invitation to the major. I’ll share
what I’ve learned about why and how to study philosophy as an
undergraduate at Rutgers.

First, an introduction: Rutgers University houses one of the top three
philosophy departments in the world. Not only that, but the department
just received a \$3 million donation from the Andrew W. Mellon
Foundation and an anonymous donor to fund the department’s first endowed
chair. This will be sure to bring another of the world’s top
philosophers to Rutgers. Here and now is the best time and place to
start a philosophy major or minor, and here’s how …

### The first step: The Philosophy Club

If you've made it this far, then you’ve probably always considered
yourself philosophically minded, but are unsure if you’re really
interested in the major. Or alternatively, you’re in the major and
you’re looking to broaden your philosophical thinking. The Rutgers
Undergraduate Philosophy Club is *perfect* for this.

Picture Greek philosophers, and you see togas and beards. But, when you
picture Rutgers philosophy, you should see a conference table flanked on
every side by sharp students led by a distinguished member of faculty,
or a rising star in Rutgers’ graduate program. Since its creation in its
present form last year, the Rutgers Philosophy Club has been the best
place for undergraduates to connect with a broad array of philosophical
topics. The meetings are held on Friday's at 5:00PM. While they
officially end at 6:30PM, it is often buzzing long after that. The
meetings are open to all.

While every speaker is free to choose his or her own format, the most
frequent is a presentation, followed by a question-and-answer session.
Every meeting is entirely independent from all of the others, and often
the presentations assume nothing about the audience's philosophical
background. Likewise, the curious-minded are free to wander in to
whatever meeting they choose. This is because the Rutgers Philosophy
Club practices "analytic philosophy," which strives to be
straightforwardly clear about both the question being asked and the
answer given.

So, who are professional philosophers and what types of questions do
they ask? Modern philosophy is practiced by all sorts of folks, and
investigates issues like: What is real? How do we know? What is good?
What is beautiful? What is just? What is the mind? What is language?
What is science? And even, perhaps a bit vainly, what is philosophy?

The Philosophy Club has been honored to host Rutgers faculty members
Prof. Peter Klein, Prof. Douglas Husak, and Prof. Alvin Goldman to talk
on these topics. Of graduate students, the Philosophy Club has also
formerly hosted Lisa Mirrachi, David Black, Rodrigo Borges, Marilie
Coetsee, and Michael Smith, who came to share their philosophical
insight.

Regardless of what classes you’ve taken or what your background is, the
answers to these philosophical questions are ones you have views on! Do
you jump off of cliffs contemplating the *meaninglessness* of everything
and how you cannot *know* about *gravity*? Do you see how that would be
a *bad* thing for you to do? That it would *cause*you as *person* to
cease to *exist*? That it would be *unfair*on your family? Philosophy
Club is a setting where you can learn about yourself, and develop your
views on these fundamental issues.

### The next step: Making Philosophy

Students are not restricted to being on the audience's side of the
conference table, however. An important part of the student
philosopher's philosophical progress is expressing their ideas to
others, seeing exactly where it is that others may disagree, and
considering whose arguments are stronger.

If you have gone to philosophy club and want to take the next step,
there are at least three ways to move forward: (1) write a thesis, (2)
participate in the undergraduate conference, and (3) work with an
undergraduate journal.

#### Theses

The first step you should take to “make philosophy” is to write a paper
that attempts to contribute to philosophical progress. Although you can
look up all the logistics of thesis writing on the Rutgers Philosophy
Department website, I’ll share some of the harder aspects of it. Namely,
(1) picking a topic and (2) securing an advisor.

As a prerequisite to finding the issue that shakes you to your very
core, take a well-balanced set of courses. I'd recommend every
philosophy major take *at least*an epistemology, a metaphysics, and an
ethics course. While in those classes, consider which of the debates you
enjoy the most: perhaps you like the back-and-forthedness of the Gettier
counterexample literature, the fundamentality of metaphysics, or a
particular moral issue.

When you think you have a candidate for something you could write deeply
about, jump up to the 400-level course with a tenured faculty member in
that field, and go to office hours to talk over your papers for the
course. Rutgers faculty are encouraging and exciting to work with, but
you will need to reach out first.

Should you do well on a paper, ask the professor if they would consider
working with you to develop your writing into an honors thesis. This
would also be a great time to start discussing graduate school and
letters of recommendation, should you be interested.

#### Conferences

One place to take your completed thesis is to an undergraduate
philosophy conference, where you will present it to a national audience.
A Google search will yield calls for papers all across the country, as
more universities begin hosting such conferences. Should your work be
accepted, you’ll take on the job of the visitors to the Philosophy Club:
you’ll start by presenting your research, which will be followed by a
question-and-answer session. This is an amazing opportunity to hone the
skills you’ll need to be a professional philosopher. Namely,
articulating your views to an audience of your peers.

Rutgers and Princeton are among the universities hosting undergraduate
conferences, as the first annual jointly-held philosophy conference was
organized by Rutgers' own Jimmy Goodrich and Princeton's Max Siegal.
Students from NYU, McGill University, Brown University, and many more
came to Princeton to give their selected paper in the form of a
presentation. The keynote presentation was given by Rutgers' Prof.
Stephen Stich and Princeton's Prof. Michael Smith on the role of
intuitions in philosophy. It was a stimulating two-day event that will
happen again in the Spring of 2015.

#### Journals

Another avenue you can take your thesis to is that of undergraduate
journals. The role of a journal is to select and edit philosophical work
for publication, to be read by a peer-group. Just like conferences,
journals submit a “call for papers”, which you’ll receive via email, or
can find with a Google search. If selected, you’ll likely undergo a
couple round of edits and eventually receive a published copy of your
work!

At Rutgers, the undergraduate journal is called Arête. I recommend that
you submit your paper to other university’s journals, and opt to join
Arête as an editor. I recommend this for two reasons: (1) you cannot
join another university’s journal, and (2) it raises editorial concerns
to both edit and publish your own work. To join Arête, you’ll need a
special permission number from the Editor-in-Chief, which you can get
from a couple of emails. The undergraduate journal at Rutgers will give
you another set of skills you’ll need to go on in philosophy: to read,
interpret, and constructively criticize the work of your peers.

### The roadmap, completed

To begin practicing philosophy at Rutgers, attend a few sessions of the
Philosophy Club. If the issues at stake excite you, take a few classes
and find your favorite topic. After that, the philosophy major at
Rutgers is the most rewarding experience I’ve had: thinking deeply with
the help of the world’s best philosophers, submitting and participating
in conferences of like-minded peers, and in turn considering their work.
With hard work, these steps will turn you into an aspiring philosopher.
