---
layout: post
title: "Philosophy's Not Dead: The Wave Function, Breakfast Cereal, and Philosophy of X"
---

Philosophy is *the* oldest study in the world, arguably beginning when
Plato established the
[Academy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platonic_Academy) in 428 BCE.
Simultaneously, it is arguably now the most disparaged, where every few
months a leading scientist will claim [philosophy is
dead](http://philosophynow.org/issues/82/Hawking_contra_Philosophy) or
[metaphysics is
fairy-laden](http://philosophynow.org/issues/62/The_God_Delusion_by_Richard_Dawkins).
There are at least two ways to respond to this: (1) to defend philosophy
on the scientist's own stomping ground, citing examples of progress
within the scope, and (2) to justify philosophy on its own merit, to
defend the goals of philosophy.

The purpose of this article is to appeal to the scientifically-minded to
embrace philosophy because of both its contribution within scientific
domains and inquiry *and* on its own merit.

### What is Philosophy?

What is the scope of philosophy? It's *very clear* that psychologists
study people, biologists study life, physicists study energy, etc. So
what on earth does the world's oldest study actually study? A popular
answer is that philosoph*y* studies philosoph*ers*, but this just pushes
the bump in the carpet. Another popular method of working this out is to
look at the word "philosophy" and to see its meaning, which is "love of
wisdom." Unfortunately, this is too cryptic and still just pushes the
bump in the carpet. Perhaps a look into the hard-and-fast divisions of
the subfields of analytic philosophy will help. They are:

1.  [Logic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logic), "What is *truth*
and how does it work?";

2.  [Metaphysics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaphysics), "What
is *real*?";

3.  [Epistemology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epistemology),
"What is *knowledge*?";

4.  [Ethics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethics), "What is *good*
to do?";

5.  [Politics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Politics), "What is
*justice*?";

6.  [Aesthetics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aesthetics), "What
is *beauty*?"

But this answer won't do either, for two reasons. First, I don't think
this is going to impress the scientifically-minded skeptic that
philosophy is worthwhile or rigorous. Second, and thankfully, this
taxonomy fails to capture where most of the progress has been in
philosophy: the "philosophy of *X*s." There is a "philosophy of ..." for
practically every field, with some of the most prominent being the
[philosophy of
science](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_science), the
[philosophy of
language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_language), and the
[philosophy of mind](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_mind).

In this article I'll map out one such Òphilosophy of XÓ study and appeal
to the scientifically-minded skeptic that it is both properly a field of
philosophy *and* is as rigorous and as worthwhile as empirical science.
Specifically, I think that there are two intellectual activities at
play: (1) the "first-order" observation and hypothesizing about physical
phenomena, and (2) the "second-order" interpretation and synthesis of
these hypotheses into the broader corpus. In (2) is where I see the
scientifically-minded skeptic embracing the practice of philosophy.

### Philosophy of Physics: An Open Question

Hypothetically consider an omniscient, but somewhat limited, god at the
very beginning of space and time. This god only knows everything about
the present moment, but it is indeed *everything*, including the
position and velocity of all particles and the laws which govern them.
Whatever laws are is a question for another article.  All we need to
think about is what is logically consistent with such an imaginary
being.

Is this enough information to determine [how the universe will
end](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultimate_fate_of_the_universe#Theories_about_the_end_of_the_universe)?
If it is not possible to determine the course of the universe like this,
[are there
probabilities](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpretations_of_quantum_mechanics#Challenges_to_interpretation)?
Perhaps there's a certain probability of a [heat
death](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_death_of_the_universe) and a
certain probability of a [big crunch death of the
universe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Crunch). Could this
hypothetical being determine these? Are the probabilities somehow "in
the world" and observable, or merely just a instrumental frequency count
we assign to sufficiently complex phenomena? If this omniscient being
can neither determine the course of our universe nor work out with
certain probabilities, what is it that binds together frames in space
and time? Is it entirely random? Whether or not these are these problems
interest you, these are the sorts of questions where I think philosophy
can help physics, in the interpretation of these physical observation
and hypotheses.

Questions of determinism and indeterminism are of clear philosophical
interest, and hinge on the findings of our fundamental physics. If our
universe were purely Newtonian  "[clockwork
universe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clockwork_universe)," then with
enough investigation we could come to predict the end of our universe
and our choice of breakfast cereal tomorrow morning. On the other hand,
if our best physics has probability or indeterminacy built-in, then the
end of our universe and our choice of breakfast cereal may very well be
unknowable. This is consequential to our understandings of ourselves and
our ability to choose, of what it is to make the good choice, and of
what it is that we can in principle come to understand.

We have two questions here: (1) What *is*? (2) What does that *mean*?
Philosophers are interested, just like physicists, in determining what
is. In addition, I hold that philosophy is uniquely the study of how to
"glue" what *is* with our everyday lives. This is where I think
philosophy parts ways from pure observation.

### Science & Philosophy Side-by-Side

This taxonomy is not at all divisive, it's just the case that some eager
minds wish to carefully observe the world and hypothesize about it (what
"is"), while others want to take those hypotheses and make them cohere
with the rest of the corpus of human understanding (what does "it"
mean?), and those categories are not at all mutually exclusive. This
distinction is between a straightforward hypothesis of the physical
world and a picture, understanding, or conception of experienced world.
The question of what the world is actually like will overlap with the
study of metaphysics, specifically, it is exactly the study of ontology,
which asks, "What is *being*?" The question of how and whether we can
come to know what the world is like is an epistemological question.
Whether or not there is a pre-determined end to our actions should
inform our intuitions about ethics, like can you blame someone for an
action they were pre-determined to perform? As such, the question
trickles into how to organize our society in the fairest way.
Furthermore, I take this to be how the hardcore physicists' own domain
of inquiry will contribute to the classic questions of philosophy.

The determinism/indeterminism debate above is directly observed in
quantum phenomena, where our best hypotheses use a [wave
function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_function) to describe the
state of particles. However, I claim that nothing in the fundamental
physics of our world could in principle answer questions like (2). 
That's one of the domains of philosophy, to reconcile the latest and
greatest discoveries with other, more ordinary observations and our
[strongest
intuitions](http://appliedsentience.com/2014/03/18/how-reliable-are-our-intuitions-a-review-of-the-first-princeton-rutgers-undergraduate-philosophy-conference/).
Nothing about the way the world is is going to tell about how we should
act, for instance. [No fact that's come to be known will tell us whether
we can know that
fact](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/reliabilism/#ProForEarProRel).
Some of our best theories of physics hold we should abandon our everyday
notions of space and time, of simultaneity, of color, of mind. My use of
philosophy is to reconcile this objective study of the world with what
it's like to be human.