---
layout: post
title: The First Princeton-Rutgers Undergraduate Philosophy Conference
---

Last week, undergraduate philosophers from across North America made the
pilgrimage to Princeton for the first annual undergraduate philosophy
conference held as a partnership between Princeton University and
Rutgers University.

The keynote of the event was a keynote conversation between Stephen
Stich of Rutgers University and Michael Smith of Princeton University.
They presented their take on the inadmissibility and indispensability of
intuitions in philosophical reasoning, respectively.

The conference was organized by two Seniors in undergraduate philosophy,
Max Siegel of Princeton and Jimmy Goodrich of Rutgers. For my small
part, I created the website, which you can find
[here](http://www.PRUPC.com).

### What happens at philosophy conferences?

Philosophy is a field which is practiced in many different ways and
places: Aristotle's famous Lyceum was a grove and gymnasium, Sartre and
Camus preferred to hang out at coffee shops like Cafe de Flore, and
Nietzsche liked thinking on long walks through wilderness. What are
professional philosophers up to now? How do you even practice
philosophy?

Philosophy doesn't have the kind of evidence and mathematics people are
familiar with in the physical sciences.  Instead, we look at the nature
of concepts and logic, and we manipulate our intuitions in order to
study these things.   Roughly, what this translates into at philosophy
conferences is that presentations are given which reflect a
philosopher's latest research, a formal argument for a view or its
rejection.

For example, Liz Jackson of Kansas State University, one of the
undergraduate presenters at the conference, argued that a given view
about the connection between blameworthiness and belief was inadequate,
and she offered her own fix for the inadequacy. The way this worked was
she crafted a counterexample to the existing view about the link between
belief and blameworthiness, which was both supported by our intuitions
and by her motivating reasons to reject the view.  Her solution, she
argued, was more consistent with our strongest and more common
intuitions.

Another activity that happens at philosophy conferences is perhaps, if I
may, a bit more exciting than presentations: debate! It happens quite a
bit in the public and private spheres, on TV and Facebook and in court.
Philosophers are no different. At PRUPC the keynote was a debate between
Stephen Stich, presenting his case *against* the use of intuitions in
philosophy, with Michael Smith, presenting his case *for*the use of
intuitions in philosophy.

### What did the undergraduates have to offer?

The presentations were varied and compelling, ranging from the topics of
ethics to philosophy of math to assertion. Beginning with some
epistemology, Gabriel Lariviere came all the way from [McGill
University](http://www.mcgill.ca) offer some insight about the
[knowledge
norm](http://cms.unige.ch/lettres/philo/wiki/Knowledge_Norm_of_Assertion)
of [assertion](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/assertion/). In the
same section, Liz Jackson of [Kansas State
University](http://www.k-state.edu) presented her work on the connection
between [believing and being
blameworthy](http://certaindoubts.com/?p=3354). Both received comments
and criticism from [Rodrigo Borges](http://www.rodrigoborgesphil.net) of
Rutgers University.

Hailing from Orange County, California, Ryan Schering of [Chapman
University](https://www.chapman.edu) presented his work, ["A Rejection
of the Metacoherence
Requirement."](http://www.scribd.com/doc/204082171/A-Rejection-of-the-Metacoherence-Requirement)
Zech Blaesi of [New York University](http://www.nyu.edu) challenged
Richard Joyce's argument for [moral error
theory](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/moral-anti-realism/) in his
["Myths of
Morality"](https://www.academia.edu/6287330/Myths_of_Morality_Joyces_Moral_Error_Theory_Meets_a_Pluralistic_Hypothesis)
presentation. Both received comments from Georgi Gardiner of Rutgers
University.

[Ethan Perets](http://www.columbiaspectator.com/author/ethan-perets) of
[Columbia University](http://www.columbia.edu) presented "Prospective
Memory and Determination of the Subject Referent." Isaac Neely of
[University of Texas at Austin](https://www.utexas.edu) presented
"Hume's Labyrinth: Hume and the Self." Both received comments from
[Simon
Cullen](http://www.princeton.edu/forbescollege/people/resident-graduate-student/simon-cullen/)
of Princeton University.

[Philip Bold](https://brown.academia.edu/PhilipBold) of [Brown
University](http://www.brown.edu) responded to a variant of the
Benacerraf-Field problem for [Mathematical
Platonism](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/platonism-mathematics/) in
his ["Would Reliability in Arithmetic Be
Striking?"](https://www.academia.edu/6377488/Would_Reliability_in_Arithmetic_be_Striking).
Helen Zhao of [Johns Hopkins University](http://www.jhu.edu) presented
her work on [Aristotle](http://www.iep.utm.edu/aristotl/) in her "On Our
Knowledge of Primary Substances." Both received comments from [Yoaav
Isaacs](http://scholar.princeton.edu/yisaacs/) of Princeton University.

### What's the debate about philosophical intuitions?

Philosophers will often use wild hypotheticals to appeal to our
intuitions about a topic: for instance, the trolley cases in ethics or
the Gettier cases in epistemology. Intuitionism is, roughly, the view
that our intuitions about a domain are useful or true or justified or
similar, with most forms of Intuitionism being a combination of these.
For instance, moral intuitionism is a view about the epistemology of
morality, or the study how we come to know about ethics.  It holds that
when we *intuit* that some action is wrong or perhaps that some end is
valuable, we are at least *prima facie* justified in believing it or
asserting it.  Intuitionist views don't claim that *every* intuition is
correct, but more reasonably that if we carefully consider, compare, and
systematize our intuitions, then we can get the truth.

Professor Stephen Stich presented his argument against the use of
intuitions in philosophy on grounds that intuitions about the same cases
differ based on many effects that should have nothing to do with the
truth. For instance, some of his work, among many others, shows that if
we change the *order* of the presentation of various trolley cases, the
respondents will change their intuitions. Furthermore, respondents from
different cultures and ethnicities had different intuitions about
different cases in ethics, philosophy of mind, epistemology, and other
fields. For example, east Asian culture were more likely than to ascribe
knowledge in Gettier cases than others polled. Of course, the order we
hear about the cases or what culture we hail from should not matter if
our intuitions are justified and reflect something about each case
individually.

On the other side of the debate, Michael Smith defended the use of
intuitions in philosophy on grounds that it can do so much for
philosophical reasoning. His way of showing this began with Descartes'
*cogito*, covered here a few months ago. His claim was that in
intuitively investigating the statement "I think therefore I am", all
major problems in philosophy could be derived.

1.  If you are thinking, you can posit that other people are too,
and you get *the problem of other minds* in *philosophy of mind*.
2.  If you are, you can ask what it is to be and what's the nature
of being, which is the role of *metaphysics*.
3.  You can think about "what should I think, which is
*epistemology*.
4.  "I am, what should I do?" is *ethics*, and so on.

After the two professors presented their case and responded to some
questions, they both sat at the front together to discuss the topics
one-to-one. For developing and eager undergraduates like myself, Jimmy,
Max, and all who attended, to see these two brilliant philosophers
casually discuss so exciting a topic was thrilling.

### A review of the debate

Professor Stich's research into the variability of intuitions is *very*
damning for the person who wants to defend their use. It's really
important to myself and many others that philosophy is effective at *the
truth*, in whatever way it might do so. If intuitions vary with culture
or society, and we're systematically using these intuitions to guide
philosophical reasoning, then *philosophy varies with culture and
society*. But! Truth doesn't vary with culture or society, so how can
philosophy be getting at any truth?

Professor Smith's investigation, on the other hand, into what's possible
with intuitions appealed to the beauty of armchair philosophy that
continues to motivate my studies. The way that he showed how many
different questions and answers could be accessed *a priori* since
Descartes' unshakable pillar was ingenious and, to me, convincing.

Despite this, the armchair philosopher should be worried of the
skepticism that results from the inadmissibility of intuitions in
philosophy. But I think moving from the variability of intuitions to the
utter inadmissibility of intuitions is too hasty.  When something is
intuitive in contexts other than philosophy, it's taken to be a virtue,
but only on first glance. It is *intuitive* that every even number is
divisible by two, and this is a good thing for someone that makes such a
claim.  However, mathematicians are going to need a proof. It is
*unintuitive* that the fundamental nature of our world has anything to
do with *n-*dimensional strings (or akin), but sufficient evidence will
move me to adopt such a belief.

I propose philosophers treat intuitions in this sense. If you are
working on your theory about knowledge or mind or value and your
argument uses intuition or your theory is intuitive, you should take
this as good *prima facie* reason to adopt your view. This is going to
be similarly good evidence for people that share the intuition, but be
prepared, almost as a sociological fact about philosophers: someone will
not share the intuition. And for them, we need to have prepared an
argument devoid of that intuition.

### What do you think?

What do you think is the status of your own intuitions? Surely, you find
it quite intuitive that "murder is wrong,""2 + 2 = 4," or things even
more basic such as the Law of Non-Contradiction? And things similarly
quite counter-intuitive, like that our world rests on the back of
infinitely many massive turtles. 

So the question is, do you think these intuitions are sufficient
evidence to conclude anything about the nature of morality, math, or the
Universe? If you do, then how can you account for people with intuitions
that are different? If you don't, how to do you explain or justify our
daily reliance on them?  And regardless, how do you account for that
persuasive and powerful feeling of truth towards intuitive claims?
