---
layout: post
title: How Do Philosophers Use Logic?
---

One of philosopher's favorite activities is *distinguishing* between
things. Where we have some concept like "moral action" or "beautiful
objects", we investigate their nature by distinguishing *kinds* of moral
action or *types* of beautiful objects.

In everyday conversation, one of the best and most often practiced ways
of making progress in a field or an activity is to *reason*, that is to
assert something and then make other statementswhich in some way support
it. In the context of Humanistic or religious debate, when a person
commits themselves to a belief about humanity's purpose or the meaning
of existence, giving reasons which structurally support the claim is an
effective way of persuading another or exploring one's own views.

### The Set Up

These structures, in a philosophical context, are called *arguments*,
and not only do they have a logical structure but they also have
components, which are expressions of what philosophers call
*propositions*. Consider the following, and perhaps familiar, argument:

1.  If the building-blocks of life are irreducibly complex, then there
    is a Creator.
1.   The building-blocks of life are irreducibly complex.
1.   Therefore, there is a Creator.

Philosophers have given formal names and definitions to the structure
and components to this argument, which they also take to be
distinguishable. To tease out one from the other, it's helpful to
replace the string "the building blocks of life are irreducibly complex"
with the some symbol, for instance *p,* and "there is a Creator" with
another shorter symbol, say *m*. This yields the following,

1.   If *p*, then *m*.
1.   *p*.
1.   Therefore, *m*.

Now this gets very interesting: If you fill in the *p* and *m* symbols
with a different sentence – any sentence! - you'll find that even though
the argument is completely logical and valid you may or may not agree
with the reasoning. But how could this be if all these forms of
reasoning follow *the same* structure? For instance, consider the
following replacement of *p* and *m*:

1.   If the year is 2014, then the President of the United States is
    Barack Obama.
1.  The year is 2014.
1.  Therefore, the President of the United States is Barack Obama.

Imagine a person, perhaps it's even yourself, that wants to grant or
accept the truth of the reasoning in the Presidential argument but not
in the Creator argument. What tools does the person have for rejecting
one but not the other if they follow the same structure? They both seem
to contain the same method of reasoning, but one must be making
some*other* mistake!

### Soundness and Validity

This is where philosophers distinguish *valid* from *sound*, which
you've probably encountered already in day to day conversation.

Soundness is a relatively easy to understand. An argument is said to be
sound only when it's premises are *actually true*. In other words, the
following argument is *not* sound:

1.  If Bertrand Russel is alive, then the Internet is pink.
1.  Bertrand Russel is alive.
1.  Therefore, the Internet is pink.

*What?* That's exactly right: This argument is not sound. Beginning with
(1), a reasonable person will deny that Bertrand Russel's living
presence has nothing to do with the color of the Internet, which is an
absurd idea in itself. Of (2), a gloss of his Wikipedia page will show
that Bertrand Russel has been deceased for some time. Because (1) and
(2) are not true, using them to get (3) is no good.  Now some day we
might find, against all perceptions to the contrary, that the internet
has color and is pink, but it's not pink because of (1) and (2).

Validity is somewhat more tricky to understand. Validity is what applies
to what I've been calling the "structure" of argument. Validity doesn’t
have to do with the truth of the premises, but the structure or form of
the argument. An argument is said to be valid *only* if the premises are
true and the conclusion must also be true. Notice of our absurd Colored
Internet reasoning that *if it were the case* that Bertrand Russel's
being alive *really did* affect whatever the color of the Internet is,
and also if Bertrand Russel *really was alive*, that we'd be *forced to
accept* that (3), the "Internet is pink."  If premises (1) and (2) are
true, then (3), i.e. the conclusion, must also be true.

To really reinforce this notion, go back to the symbols of *p* and *m*.
Construct an "if-then" statement you believe is true with *p* and *m*,
and notice that when the "if-then" is true and the "if clause" is true,
you feel compelled to accept *m*.

Now back to our imaginary person who wants to reject the Creator
argument above and accept the Presidential argument. With this
distinction they can now say of both arguments that they are *valid* but
only the Presidential argument is *sound*. We can see two things in the
Creator argument. Of (1), they could say that irreducible complexity can
arise in other ways than by a Creator or Designer. Or of (2) they might
say that there is nothing which is irreducibly complex. Either of these
empirical or theoretical observations would show the argument isn’t
sound. And because the Creator argument isn’t *sound*, our reasoner does
not accept it, even in the face of its validity.

### An Open Question

What I find very interesting question about this distinction is where
does validity "come from?" What I mean is, it is very obvious to me and
everyone I've encountered that *modus ponens* (the name given to the
structure of the arguments in this piece) is a "good" way of reasoning,
but where does this goodness come from? Is the source of its goodness
some deep truth about the nature of the universe which we all have
access to? Or is the source its repeated success in our repeated use? In
other words, is it just that it works?

Another way philosophers pose this question is, is valid reasoning
*normative*? Do we form *norms* about ways of reasoning and impose them
on ourselves and others? Or have we accessed the truth about reasoning?
One  fact relevant to this question is that you can construct a "truth
table" with this form of reasoning and show that in every case of
soundness you get a true conclusion. It is *objectively* demonstrable,
then you can investigate it yourself.

But objectivity and "deep truths" aren't the same. For instance, it's
objectively demonstrable that Rutgers University educates many people,
but this isn't a "deep truth about the Universe".

What do you think? Is valid reasoning fundamentally true in some way? Or
do we construct for ourselves norms which are "just reliable" or
something akin? Is this question even sensible to ask?
